Publish 22.0.0.10-beta blog post (#2533)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-09-01-java-19-22.0.0.10-beta.adoc

author_github: https://github.com/reecenana
seo-title: Java 19 and MicroProfile OpenTelemetry previews in Open Liberty 22.0.0.10-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Java SE 19 and MicroProfile OpenTelemetry 1.0 are released this month so we bring you previews of both in this Open Liberty 22.0.0.10-beta. MicroProfile OpenTelemetry provides a standards-based set of APIs, SDKs, tooling and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. 
blog_description: Java SE 19 and MicroProfile OpenTelemetry 1.0 are released this month so we bring you previews of both in this Open Liberty 22.0.0.10-beta. MicroProfile OpenTelemetry provides a standards-based set of APIs, SDKs, tooling and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. 
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Java 19 and MicroProfile OpenTelemetry previews in Open Liberty 22.0.0.10-beta
Reece Nana <https://github.com/reecenana>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Java SE 19 and MicroProfile OpenTelemetry 1.0 are released this month so we bring you previews of both in this Open Liberty 22.0.0.10-beta. Java 19 provides several new and changed features, including record patterns and virtual threads. MicroProfile OpenTelemetry provides a standards-based set of APIs, SDKs, tooling and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs.

Reviewer: It is used both ways, but I believe it should be MicroProfile Telemetry 1.0.  MicroProfile exposes the Open Telemetry function, but the MP name does not include the word Open.

Reviewer: To be clear, I am looking for anywhere MicroProfile OpenTelemetry be updated to MicroProfile Telemetry.  If the word MicroProfile is not before OpenTelemetry that can remain.

Author: Bah! Sorry, that's my fault. I'll fix.

Author: Fixed

> Also in this beta, the Jakarta XML Binding tools, `xjc` and `schemagen` have been repackaged for Jakarta XML Binding 4.0, and you can now expose SPI interfaces as BELL services and inject properties into BELL services. In a previous beta, we introduced distributed security caches which has now been updated so that you no longer need to include the `distributedSecurityCache-1.0` feature in your `server.xml`.

Reviewer: This isn't really accurate because we aren't updating the xjc and schemagen tools.  It would be better to talk about the updates to the XML Binding API.

To use this feature update your `server.xml`: 
[source, xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-1.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

You can view the telemetry data from your application in link:https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.37/monitoring/#traces[Jaeger] and link:https://zipkin.io/pages/quickstart.html[Zipkin]. To export your traces to one of these exporters, configure the exporter with system properties, e.g. `-Dotel.traces.exporter=jaeger` or environment variables, e.g. `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=jaeger`.  You can also configure the exporter endpoints using `OTEL_EXPORTER_JAEGER_ENDPOINT` and `OTEL_EXPORTER_ZIPKIN_ENDPOINT`.  To specify the name of the service, use `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`.
   
For more information about MicroProfile Telemetry, see:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[Microprofile Telemetry]
* link:https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.11.0/specification/trace/api.md[OpenTelemetry specification]
* link:https://opentelemetry.io[opentelemetry.io]

// https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/22092
[#xml]
== Repackaging of tools for XML binding (Jakarta XML Binding 4.0)

> Jakarta XML Binding 4.0 is an API for automating the mapping between XML documents and Java objects when writing XML documents in Java. The Jakarta XML Binding 4.0 feature provides the Jakarta XML Binding 4.0 tools for marshaling and unmarshaling XML to Java: `xjc` and `schemagen`, which are unchanged since Jakarta EE 9.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jakarta XML Binding 4.0 is an API for automating the mapping between XML documents and Java objects when writing XML documents in Java. By and large, the xmlBinding-4.0 feature is identical to xmlBinding-3.0, with a couple of exceptions. The 4.0 spec has removed the deprecated `jakarta.xml.bind.Validator API`. This means, if your application is using Validator to validate your JAX-B data types, you'll need to update to use the more common schema validation method. Here's an example of how to move from the Validator to schema validation: 
```
      // With Validator: 
      SomeJAXBDataOjbect dataObject = new SomeJAXBDataObject();

      JAXBContext context = JAXBContext.newInstance(new Class<>{]{ClassToBeBound.class, ClassToBeBound2.class, …});
      JAXBSource source = new JAXBSource(context, dataObject);

      Validator validator = schema.newValidator();
      validator.setErrorHandler(c);
      validator.validate(source);

      // With Schema Validation - Suggested alternative since 2.0. 

      JAXBContext context = JAXBContext.newInstance(new Class<>{]{ClassToBeBound.class, ClassToBeBound2.class, …});
      
      Unmarshaller junmarshaller = jaxbContext.createUnmarshaller();
       
      SchemaFactory schemaFactory = SchemaFactory.newInstance(XMLConstants.W3C_XML_SCHEMA_NS_URI);
      Schema dataObjectSchema = schemaFactory.newSchema(new File("dataObjectSchema.xml"));
      jaxbUnmarshaller.setSchema(dataObjectSchema);
       
      SomeJAXBDataObject dataObject = (SomeJAXBDataObject dataObject) umarshaller.unmarshal(new       File("dataObjectSchema.xml"));
```
In 4.0, you can now programmatically choose an alternative XML Binding Implementation. Provided you package the implementation with the application, then you simply need to set the name of the implementation in a property map, and pass the map along when instantiating a JAXBContext object. Here's an example doing just that with Eclipe's Moxy implementation:

```
       String JAXB_CONTEXT_FACTORY = "jakarta.xml.bind.JAXBContextFactory";
       String MOXY_JAXB_CONTEXT_FACTORY = "org.eclipse.persistence.jaxb.XMLBindingContextFactory";

       ClassLoader classLoader = some.package.with.jaxb.data.objects.ObjectFactory.class.getClassLoader();
       Map<String, String> properties = new HashMap<String, String>();
       properties.put(JAXB_CONTEXT_FACTORY, MOXY_JAXB_CONTEXT_FACTORY);
       JAXBContext context = JAXBContext.newInstance("some.package.with.jaxb.data.objects",
                                       classLoader, properties);
```
